Introduction

Imagine waking one morning thrust from your soft, cozy bed into a strange new world. A square sun crosses the sky. You have no tools or weapons-nothing but your bare, knobby hands. You briefly survey the landscape. Hills and forests surround you. A cow lows in the distance. On a hunch you look for a Horn of Plenty-anything that may deliver something useful. Every other RPG you've played has plenty of stuff lying around. But it's a fruitless search with no cache in sight. Curiously, though, one of your random clicks does dig a hole in the ground. Interesting. But how does it help? You try again. Another hole. Hmmm. You continue your reconnaissance, admiring the varied terrain, soaring cliffs, verdant forests, and clear blue lakes. It certainly is pleasing to the eye, but this universe seems to work by unfamiliar rules. The sun is moving far too briskly across the sky, and nightfall now looks like it's mere minutes away. That can't be good. You start a kind of random flail, clicking everything in sight. The trunk of a tree looks promising. Aha! A block of wood falls to the ground. But what to do with it? You have to figure that out later. Darkness descends, and with it comes an unearthly groan. Strange figures appear in the distant gloom, lurching toward you. A slithering slurp shrieks into your senses from behind. A cold finger of fear trips down your spine. You run for the base of the nearest cliff. If your back's against the wall, it might as well be a sturdy one. Wait a moment. Is that the mouth of a cave? Perfect! A final quick dash sees you safely inside. The darkness turns to an inky black. You stumble down a ledge putting more distance between you and the horrifying creatures outside. Stop, breathe, look around. You hear the briefest hiss, like a burning fuse. Frantically spinning to find the source, you catch a glimpse of a ghastly green face. It's the last you'll see before a gigantic explosion claims your life. Welcome to Minecraft and a typical experience for the millions of players who buy this game in everincreasing numbers on every major platform. Minecraft is, without doubt, one of the most interesting open-ended games ever produced. It's also one of the most vexatious. From the first moment I started playing this game, back in the beta, to today's extraordinary experience, Minecraft has developed into a tour de force of absolutely splendid gameplay, but one that is not easily accessible.

Before I even thought about writing this book I found it popping up more and more frequently in random conversations among all age levels-everyone from my nine-year old's best friends going on up...way up. Minecraft's unique open-endedness offers an equally open-ended fascination to people of all ages. Fifty million of them, and counting. Clearly, Minecraft was enjoying unparalleled success for an independent production, but there was something strange going on. The game still lacked an in-depth tutorial or documentation of any sort. And while there is no paucity of online resources, how do you explain a game where every block bends to your will; where the terrain can dance to your tune; where an electrical system can do a crazy range of things including simulating its own computer; and where other elements such as casting enchantments, brewing potions, and finding a way to get to and defeat the final boss require some curiously specific, obtuse steps and strategies? The online community has stepped into that breach admirably, going to the point of decompiling the code to understand and document specific game mechanics, but the essentials are often buried among hundreds of thousands of random Minecraft videos or tucked in with other encyclopedically detailed documentation. And, among all that, there are literally thousands of junk sites trying to trick you into clicking on ads or installing malware. This book fills the gap, bringing together all the key information you need in a single place. Written from the player's perspective, it takes you through the essentials and then far beyond with all the background information, crafting recipes, strategies, and ideas you need to make your Minecraft world truly your own. It covers everything from first-night survival to hosting your own Multiplayer server. If you are a parent wondering if Minecraft is suitable for your own kids, consider it to be as far from a consumption-only experience as old-school rote learning is from an active education filled with exploration and discovery. Minecraft will inspire great feats of imagination and a thirst for understanding how its many facets enmesh and evolve. Best of all, it's like one of those great movies or books that are marketed toward kids but entertain adults on a whole other level. Play it together-even turn off the monsters through its creative or peaceful modes-and enjoy your time playing together with kids as young as four or five. But I warn you, it's addictive. Please remember to give them a go now and then. No matter who you are or how you play, you'll find Minecraft to be an endlessly fascinating, wonderful, enjoyable world. It's going to be quite the journey!
